---
title: "New website hosting servers"
slug: "new-host"
categories: "Incidental"
tags: [
  "Website",
  "Personal website",
  "Personal domain",
  "Hosting services",
  "Autistici/Inventati"
]
date: 2019-11-04
---

Until yesterday, this website had been hosted by [GitLab][gl] (using GitLab
Pages). For some time now the fact that they used servers owned by Google
bothered me, so I have been looking for a new host for a while.

One possibility I looked at was paying for a virtual private server. They aren't
particularly expensive, but since the complete website's size is under 1MiB, a
whole virtual server is a bit too much. Of course, I could use it to host other
services (maybe a private Gitea instance, or a database to backup my files), but
those are services that I don't need right now. Besides, I still wouldn't have
any power to ensure no IPs of my visitors are logged somewhere, so it wouldn't
solve my problems.

Another option I considered was getting a home server. I would love to learn how
to build a server out of nothing, set it up and get it up and running, but I
don't want to have a computer running 24&#47;7 at home and, if it was to stop
working, my website would be down for some time (until I had spare time to fix
it). Indubitably, any server can have downtime, but I trust that volunteers
partly dedicated to maintaining servers will be able to fix issues before I can
do it myself.

So I had to find a privacy respecting host that would serve a small static site
like mine at a reasonable price. I found a couple of sites that interested me,
but [Autistici/Inventati][ai] was the one that got most of my attention. First
of all, they respect users' privacy—or so they claim—and it is one of the
projects that has given me the best impression in this matter so far. They also
have a decentralized network thanks to the [R* plan][r] and, on top of that, the
project has ethical values that I share (something that I wasn't looking for in
a host, but is much appreciated). Finally, my hosting is free of charge,
although I will donate to the project to help it keep running.

In conclusion, I am very happy with my new host. It is better than what I was
looking for and I get to choose how much I want to pay for it. What is more, I
know that anything I donate to support it will go to a project trying to make a
better internet.


[gl]: <https://gitlab.com> "GitLab"
[ai]: <https://www.autistici.org> "Autistici/Inventati"
[r]: <https://www.autistici.org/who/rplan/> "R* plan — Autistici/Inventati"
