---
title: "A new world of software"
slug: "new-world-of-software"
categories: "Technology"
tags: [
  "FOSS",
  "Software"
]
date: 2019-12-24
---

As I have said before, I was a big user of big tech companies' services. I also
used macOS (and Windows before that) and proprietary software for mostly
everything. I didn't really know what free[^fsw] software was and, if I was
running any, it was by coincidence.

[^fsw]: Here (and throughout the post) I am talking about [free as in
  freedom][fs] software.

At college, I discovered the world of GNU/Linux. I had an old computer that was
very slow and someone promised that GNU/Linux would make it significantly
faster, so I installed Debian next to macOS. This way, every time I turned on my
computer I would be able to choose which operating system I wanted to use, and
if something happened to my GNU partition, I could still use the computer as
before. Even with Debian installed, the computer eventually started to become
too slow for my needs and I bought a new computer where I also installed Debian
next to the default OS. As for the old computer, I eventually erased both
partitions and installed Manjaro with XFCE instead, I don't use it much anymore
because of its limitations.

Progressively, I learned more and more about free software and I decided to use
the Debian partition nearly-exclusively. Ultimately, I got used to the new
desktop environment, the new tools (the terminal!) and all the new different
things you find in GNU/Linux. There has been an interesting side effect of using
Debian as my daily operative system: most of the software I now run is
free/libre as a result of it.

I always thought free software was either worse than the proprietary alternative
or non-existent for a given task. What I have realized is that there are free
options for most of the use cases and that once you are used to the terminal,
they can even be easier to work with, work faster and be more reliable.
Moreover, they normally[^ime] are also lighter programs, use fewer resources and
generally follow standards (whereas proprietary software creates its own
protocols/file types more frequently).

[^ime]: That is generally in my experience.

Don't get me wrong, there are advantages to proprietary software. It can
sometimes work better, be nicer or more intuitive. Maybe it just suits your
needs better because it's what you are used to. There may be commodities we are
familiar with in proprietary software that are hard to let go of. However, in my
case, it has gotten to the point that it is the other way around. It is hard to
let go the easy installation process of free software, without license
complications, the fact that it is available for GNU/Linux operative systems,
the community around the software, the minimalism of the tools that get the job
done, without the need of thousands of extra features.

There is a whole world of efficient and useful software that I had never
*really* explored and I now see why so many people use it. I no longer look for
free/libre *alternatives* to a proprietary program, but it is the only kind of
software that I look for. Dealing with closed source and proprietary software is
now my plan B, when everything else fails.

## Final note

Firstly, in this post I claim certain qualities of both free and proprietary
software. It is always spoken from my experience and perspective, your
experience may be different. They are also qualities that I commonly find,
instead of a claim that all software on a given category has them. Secondly, I
deliberately left aside the ethical component of free software, as it wasn't
what I wanted to talk about, however, you might be interested in reading more
about it.


[fs]: <https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html> "What is free software? â€” GNU Project"
