<!-- title: Improving ergonomics: the Atreus keyboard -->
<!-- slug: atreus -->
<!-- categories: Miscellany -->
<!-- date: 2020-10-18T21:05:00Z -->

Back in March, at the start of the lockdown, I had a lot of free time. I also
had a lot of ideas for personal projects and functionalities for my server, so I
started coding a lot. I realized that since I was spending a lot of time on my
computer, without any time constraints, I could use the opportunity to try
things I was always "too busy" to try. Things that I knew would make me more
efficient on my computer, but had a steep learning curve. For example, I started
using [i3][i3], which I eventually changed for [dwm][dwm], and I started using
[neovim][nv] as my main editor (I had some experience with vim, but never used
it for day-to-day tasks). I now use dwm exclusively and vim nearly exclusively.

Both programs disregard the mouse completely (or nearly[^me]), and most other
programs I tried or got more comfortable with during the lockdown also used text
as the main input method. With all these changes towards a more keyboard-centric
system, I couldn't help but think: can I improve my keyboard experience? I
already touch-type, so that area didn't have a lot of room for improvement. I
could get a mechanical keyboard, but back then, I had only used membrane
keyboards and I felt perfectly comfortable, I didn't think there was a lot of
room for improvement there either, and I could not justify the economic cost of
such a change. That sounded just about everything I could improve on, so I guess
I already had a pretty optimal experience.

[^me]: In my case, I deactivate the mouse completely in neovim, as the only
  thing I use the mouse for is to select text to easily paste it with the middle
  button on another application, but I like the cursor staying where it is when
  I do it. For dwm, you can selects tags with the mouse, but I rarely do that.

*Wait a minute...*

Why are the keyboards arranged the way they are? Is it the optimal position?
Apparently, not even close! If you look around, you will see that there are a
lot of different kinds of keyboards with the keys arranged in very different
ways. Keyboards designed to be more comfortable than regular ones are normally
referred to as [ergonomic keyboards][ek]. I did some research and I tried to
understand—although it was hard to evaluate without trying them—why they are
considered more comfortable. Each keyboard had it's own pros and cons, and after
looking at many, I decided that my perfect keyboard would have the following
properties:

- **Arranged in columns**: it makes no sense for keyboards' rows to be
  staggered. Indeed, the reason for that design is that typewriters had to be
  staggered so that the levers could all fit under the keys. With computers,
  this isn't an issue anymore, and columns are more comfortable.
- **Make use of thumbs**: my right thumb's job on a normal keyboard is to press
  one big space bar and my left thumb doesn't even have a job! I would rather
  have a small space bar and fit a couple more keys for each thumb.
- **Minimize the movements of my fingers**: ideally, no finger would have to
  press any key that's not adjacent to it's "resting" key (diagonally adjacent
  is fine).
- **Easy to type modifier keys**: as I use the keyboard instead of the mouse as
  much as I can, I use modifier keys often. I would like them to be reached
  easily.
- **High distance between hands**: for a better posture when writing on my
  computer.

In short, I wanted to maximize the comfort of typing while minimizing the
movements my hands had to make. Additionally, I didn't want to spend a lot of
money (I didn't know if I was going to like moving to a different keyboard) and
also would rather not have to build the keyboard myself, although it looked like
that was the only option.

After all the research, only one keyboard seemed to fulfill all my needs: the
[Atreus keyboard][ak]. The Atreus seemed great, I would have liked it more if it
had an extra column on each side (like the [Atreus62][ak62]), but it wasn't a
big deal. The reviews on the Atreus were all great, so I decided to give it a
try.

Luckily for me, back then [Keyboardio][kbio] had just launched a Kickstarter
campaign for that precise keyboard. It had a good price for an ergonomic
keyboard and I didn't have to build it on my own. The only problem was that I'd
have to wait until the end of August to receive it, but time wasn't an issue for
me, so I bought it. Fast forward five months to two weeks ago, the keyboard
finally arrived! *(There were some delays, although the people at Keyboardio
always kept us informed, great experience overall.)*

I have been able to use the new keyboard for some time now and it looks good so
far[^nt]. It took some time to get used to the columns instead of staggered
rows, but I am doing a lot better now. It also took some time to get used to the
layers (I had to re-learn where every character is!), but after I changed the
layout to make it as intuitive as possible, the learning process has been a lot
faster.

[^nt]: I don't want to use it for day-to-day tasks yet, as I am still a bit slow
  and feel more comfortable with a regular keyboard, so I haven't used it that
  much.

Although I am liking the keyboard so far, I don't want to evaluate it
extensively while still getting used to it and I think I shouldn't reach any
conclusions until I feel more comfortable with it. I will probably write about
my experience with the Atreus in the future.


[i3]: <https://i3wm.org> "i3"
[dwm]: <https://dwm.suckless.org> "dwm"
[nv]: <https://neovim.io> "Neovim"
[ek]: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ergonomic_keyboard> "Ergonomic keyboard — Wikipedia"
[ak]: <https://atreus.technomancy.us> "Atreus keyboard"
[ak62]: <https://shop.profetkeyboards.com/product/atreus62-keyboard> "Atreus62 keyboard — Profet Keyboards"
[kbio]: <https://keyboard.io> "Keyboardio"
[vm]: <https://github.com/philc/vimium> "Vimium — GitHub"
